Ch 6 review (#486)
worldbank/dime-data-handbook: chapters/6-analysis.tex

% Intro ----------------------------------------

% Motivation
Transforming raw data into a contribution to scientific knowledge
requires a mix of subject expertise, programming skills,
and statistical and econometric knowledge.
In this chapter, we discuss the process of transforming
cleaned raw data into the final analysis dataset(s).
The process of data analysis is typically
a back-and-forth discussion between people
with differing skill sets.
An essential part of the process is translating the
raw data into economically meaningful indicators.
To effectively do this in a team environment,
data, code and outputs must be well-organized,
with a clear system for version control,
and analytical scripts structured such that any member of the research team can run them.

> Putting in time upfront to structure the data analysis workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Putting in time upfront to think through the data analysis workflow
```

in this way pays substantial dividends throughout the process.

% Chapter overview

> In this chapter, we suggest an analytical workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this chapter, we suggest a workflow
```

starting from clean raw data.
The first step is variable construction:
creating the actual outcomes of interest for analysis.
We emphasize the importance of transparently documenting research decisions

> made during indicator construction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
made in this process.
```

\section{Constructing analysis datasets}

% What is construction
For this chapter, we assume you are starting from 

> one or multiple tidy\cite{hadley2017R}\sidenote{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one or multiple well-documented tidy\cite{hadley2017R}\sidenote{
```

	\url{Available at
	https://vita.had.co.nz/papers/tidy-data.pdf}}

> and well-documented, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> datasets that have gone through thorough quality checks,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
datasets.
We also assume that these datasets
have gone through thorough quality checks,
```

> and that incorporate any corrections needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and incorporate any corrections needed.
```

The next step is to \textbf{construct}\sidenote{
	\textbf{Data construction}:
	The process of transforming cleaned data into analysis data by
	creating the derived indicators that will be analyzed.}
the dataset, or datasets, you will use for analysis;
that is, to transform the cleaned data into analysis-ready data.

> Some data might have been acquired analysis-ready,
> otherwise, this is accomplished by integrating different datasets
> and creating derived variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's possible data the acquired data is ready for analysis,
but in most cases it needs to be prepared by integrating different datasets
and creating derived variables
```

(dummies, indices, and interactions, to name a few).
The derived indicators you will construct should be
planned during research design\index{Research design};

> the pre-analysis plan should serve as your guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the pre-analysis plan should serve as your guide
```

at this stage.\index{Pre-analysis plan}
During construction, data will typically be
reshaped, merged, and aggregated to change the level of the data points

> from the \textbf{unit of \textit{observation}} in the original data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the \textbf{unit of \textit{observation}} in the raw data
```

to the \textbf{unit of \textit{analysis}}.\sidenote{\url{
		https://dimewiki.worldbank.org/Unit\_of\_Observation}}

% A project may require multiple purpose-built data sets
A constructed dataset is built to answer an analysis question.
If the sub-samples and units of observation 
vary for different pieces of the analysis

> you may need many constructed datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you may need to construct many purpose-built analysis datasets.
```

> It is often not a good practice
> to create a single ``canonical'' analysis dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such cases, it is not good practice
to try to create a single ``canonical'' analysis dataset.
```

> It is often better practice to have 
> many purpose-built analysis datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

For a concrete example of what this means,
think of an agricultural intervention 
that was randomized across villages
and only affected certain plots within each village.
The research team may want to 
run household-level regressions on income,
test for plot-level productivity gains,
and check if village characteristics are balanced.
Having three separate datasets for each of these three pieces of analysis

> will result in cleaner and more efficient analytical code than if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will result in cleaner, more efficient, and less error-prone analytical code than if
```

you started from a single analysis dataset and repeatedly transformed it.

\subsection{Fitting construction into the data workflow}

% Why construction is separate from data cleaning
Construction follows data cleaning and 
should be treated as a separate task for two reasons.
First, this helps to clearly differentiate error corrections 
(necessary for all data uses)
from creation of analysis indicators 
(necessary only for specific analyses).

> Second, it helps to ensures that variable definitions are

Reviewer: I think this is more connected to analysis then cleaning? Not sure how it ended up in this paragraph (probably me getting confused)

consistent across datasets.
Construction can create many outputs combining many inputs,
and, unlike in data cleaning,

> output datasets should be parsimonious rather than exhaustive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resulting datasets should be parsimonious rather than exhaustive.
```

test for plot-level productivity gains,
and check if village characteristics are balanced.
Having three separate datasets for each of these three pieces of analysis
will result in cleaner and more efficient analytical code than if
you started from a single analysis dataset and repeatedly transformed it.

\subsection{Fitting construction into the data workflow}

% Why construction is separate from data cleaning
Construction follows data cleaning for two reasons.
First, this helps to clearly differentiate error corrections (necessary for all data uses)
from creation of analysis indicators (necessary only for specific analyses).
Second, it helps to ensures that variable definitions are consistent across datasets.
Construction can create many outputs combining many inputs,
and, unlike in data cleaning,

> output datasets should be parsimonious rather than exhaustive.

Reviewer 2: We should use a different word than `parsimonious`. I am not even sure what the meaning of this sentence is.

will have a different sample or variable definition.
Doing all variable construction and data transformation
in a unified script, separate from the analysis code, helps
avoid this and ensures consistency across different outputs.

\subsection{Integrating different data sources}

% When merging is necessary and how to start thinking about it
To create the analysis dataset,
it is typically necessary to combine or merge information from different data sources.
For example, you may merge administrative data with survey data
in order to include demographic information in your analysis,
or you may want to integrate geographic information
in order to include location-specific controls.\sidenote{Such
	operations are commonly called ``merges'' in Stata, and
	``joins'' in R's \texttt{tidyverse} dialect.
	We will use the first term on the next few paragraphs.}
To understand how to perform such operations,
you will need to consider the unit of observation for each dataset,
and their respective identifying variables.
Merges are common sources of missing values,
and can also result in observations being dropped.
To avoid unintentional changes to your data,
pay close attention to merge results,

> and add checks to your code to very that they match what you expect.

Reviewer 2: Discussed in chapter 3 in relation to data flow charts.

Reviewer: Done in 06f9055

% Merging data sets with the same unit of observation
If the datasets you need to merge have the same unit of observation,
merging may be straightforward.
The simplest case is when the datasets have the same unit of observation
and use a consistent, uniquely and fully identifying ID variable.
For example, in the case of administrative data for firms,
you may merge data from different years using the firm taxpayer code

> (or, preferably, a de-identified version of it).

Reviewer 2: Discussed in chapter 3 in relation to data linkage tables.

Reviewer: The de-identification part? Should we just replace the example?

In such cases, the main source of unexpected results are unmatched observations.
Fortunately, it is straightforward to avoid mistakes in this setting:
before writing code to combine the datasets,
write pseudocode to understand which observations you expect to be
matched or not, and why.
When possible, determine exactly which and how many
matched and unmatched observations should result from the merge.
For example, firms that were created in the second year should not be
present in the first year's data,
and firms that closed during the first year should not be observed in the second year's data.
Then think carefully about whether you want to keep matched and unmatched
observations, or only specific matching outcomes (e.g. to create a balanced panel).
Add that to your pseudocode as well.
Now you can merge the datasets,
and test that the outcome matches your expectations.
Add comments to explain any exceptions,
and make it so the code will return an error in case unexpected results show up in future runs.

> This approach can be extended to other types of merges between two related datasets.

Reviewer 2: A lot of this is discussed in chapter 3 in relation to data flow charts.

Reviewer: Done in 06f9055

% to-do % ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
% See XXX for an example of a Stata do-file that implements these practices -- Cami's code from TUP
% ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

% Fuzzy matching
Even when merging data sets with the same unit of observations, however,
complex cases may arise.
Datasets with the same unit of observation may not have a consistent identifying variable.
One common example is for dataset identifiers to be in the form of names,
which are often spelled differently in different data sources.
In these cases, you will need to do a \textbf{fuzzy match},
to link observations that have similar identifiers.
You will need to analyze the merging patterns extensively,
understand what units are present in one dataset but not the other,

> and investigate unmatched observations to resolve imperfect matching.

Reviewer 2: Discussed in chapter 3 in relation to master datasets.

Reviewer: Done in 06f9055

while forgetting to update the other.

% Why construction is separate from analysis

> Construction of analysis data should be done right
> after data cleaning and before data analysis,
> in accordance with the pre-analysis plan.\index{Pre-analysis plan}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we visualize the research workflow,
variable construction precedes data analysis,
as derivative variables need to be created before they are analyzed.
```

will have a different sample or variable definition.
Doing all variable construction and data transformation
in a unified script, separate from the analysis code, helps
avoid this and ensures consistency across different outputs.

\subsection{Integrating different data sources}

% When merging is necessary and how to start thinking about it
To create the analysis dataset,
it is typically necessary to combine or merge information
from different data sources.
For example, you may merge administrative data with survey data
in order to include demographic information in your analysis,
or you may want to integrate geographic information
in order to include location-specific controls.\sidenote{Such
	operations are commonly called ``merges'' in Stata, and
	``joins'' in R's \texttt{tidyverse} dialect.
	We will use the first term on the next few paragraphs.}
To understand how to perform such operations,
you will need to consider the unit of observation for each dataset,
and their respective identifying variables.
Merges are common sources of missing values,
and can also result in observations being dropped.
To avoid unintentional changes to your data,
pay close attention to merge results,

> and add checks to your code to very that they match what you expect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and add checks to your code to verify that they match what you expect.
```

Integrating datasets with different units of observation may involve changing the structure of the data.
This often involves changing the unit of observation through aggregation or reshapes.
For example, you may have data on individual students in a school,
and wish to create a summary of the student-level data set to merge to the school data,
including variables such as gender proportions or average family income.
On the other hand, you may have asked farmers what quantity they harvested of different crops,
and need to reshape these observations to the crop level to merge with data on crop prices.
Both operations should always be done with great care.
Two issues to pay extra attention are missing values and dropped observations.
Make sure to read about how each command treats missing observations:
are unmatched observations dropped? Are missing values treated as zeros when aggregated?
Whenever possible, add automated checks in the script that throw an error message
if the result is different than what you expect.
If you are subsetting your data, prefer to drop observations explicitly,

> indicating why you are doing so and how the data set changed.

Reviewer 2: Discussed in chapter 3 in relation to data linkage tables and data flow charts.

% -------------------------------------------------------------------------

% Data integration
Some merges of data with different units of observation
are more conceptually complex.
Some examples include: overlaying road location data with household data,
using a spatial match; combining school administrative data, such as attendance records and test scores,
with student demographic characteristics from a survey;
or linking a dataset of infrastructure access points, such as water pumps or schools,
with a dataset of household locations.
In these cases, a key part of the research contribution is figuring out
a useful way to combine the datasets.
Since the conceptual constructs that link observations from the two data sources
are important and can take many possible forms,
it is especially important for the data integration to not be treated mechanically,

> and to be extensively documented, separately from other data construction tasks.

Reviewer 2: Discussed in chapter 3 in relation to data linkage tables.

Reviewer: Done in 06f9055

> Integrating datasets with different units of observation may involve changing the structure of the data.
> This often involves changing the unit of observation through aggregation or reshapes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Integrating datasets with different units of observation often involve changing the structure of the data,
such as transforming the unit of observation through aggregation or reshapes.
```

% -------------------------------------------------------------------------

% Data integration
Some merges of data with different units of observation
are more conceptually complex.

> Some examples include: overlaying road location data with household data,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples include: overlaying road location data with household data,
```

Second, make sure that any numeric variables you are comparing
are converted to the same scale or unit of measure:
you cannot add one hectare and two acres and get a meaningful number.
New variables should be assigned functional names,
and the dataset ordered such that related variables are together.
Adding notes to each variable will make your dataset more user-friendly.

% Dealing with outliers and missing values
At this point, you will also need to decide
how to handle any outliers or unusual values identified during data cleaning.
How to treat outliers is a research question.
There are multiple possible approaches,
and the best choice for a particular case
will depend on the objectives of the analysis.
Whatever your team decides, make sure to explicitly note
what the decision was and how it was made.
Results can be sensitive to the treatment of outliers,
so keeping the original variable in the dataset
will allow you to test how much it affects your outputs.
All these points also apply to imputation of missing values and other distributional patterns.
As a general rule, never overwrite or delete original data during the construction process.

> Always create derived indicators with new names
> (or rename the original information as \texttt{[varname]\_raw}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Always create derived indicators with new names.
```
I had never seen this suggestions before, but I don't like it.

> The way you deal with code and outputs for exploratory and final analysis is different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way you deal with code and code outputs for exploratory and final analysis is different.
```

> During exploratory data analysis,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the exploratory stage,
```

you will be tempted to write lots of analysis into one big, impressive, start-to-finish script.
While this is fine when you are writing your research stream of consciousness into code,
it leads to poor practices in the final code such as not clearing the workspace
and not loading a fresh constructed dataset before each analysis task.

% Write independent analysis scripts
To avoid mistakes, it's important to take the time
to organize the code that you want to keep, that is,
the final analysis code, in a clean manner.
The result is a curated set of polished scripts that
will be part of a reproducibility package.
A well-organized analysis script starts with a completely fresh workspace
and, for each output it creates, explicitly loads data before analyzing it.
This setup encourages data manipulation to be done earlier in the workflow
(that is, in separate cleaning and construction scripts).

> This also prevents that one of your analysis scripts 
> is dependent on another analysis script to have been run before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This also prevents the common problem of having analysis scripts 
are dependent on other analysis scripts to have been run before.
```

Such dependencies tend to require manual instructions 
for all necessary chunks of code to be run in the right order,
which is a nightmare for reproducibility.

> It encourages you to write each task so 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We encourage you to write each task so 
```

as does \textit{Data Visualization: A Practical Introduction}.\sidenote{
	\url{http://socvis.co}}
Graphics tools in Stata are highly customizable.
There is a fair amount of learning curve associated with
extremely-fine-grained adjustment,
but it is well worth reviewing the graphics manual.\sidenote{\url{
		https://www.stata.com/manuals/g.pdf}}
For an easier way around it, Gray Kimbrough's
\textit{Uncluttered Stata Graphs}
code is an excellent default replacement for Stata graphics

> that is easy to install.\sidenote{

Reviewer: There are a million user-written schemes out there, and which one to use is very subjective. I think we should either list more than one, or just mention their existence without pointing to any single one in particular.

Author: put on wiki
